OPTIMIZED ECONOMY / THE OPTIMIZED ECONOMY MANIFESTO 


SylWwester Fiet 


An economic model based 
on the potential of science 


The New Economics — The Optimized Economy 


Introduction 


Human activity can be called by various terms: economics, economy, behaviourism, 
herd logistics, etc. This is a secondary issue, essentially limited to semantics. What is at 
the heart of the issue is that, as intelligent beings, we are not condemned solely to 
spontaneous mechanisms (e.g. the free market), but we can (and do so with increasing 
success) create reality. Creation can be qualitatively different. It can be a strictly 
economic creation (understood as an intentional and planned action), which does not 
work out well for us as humanity, but it can also be a creation relating to the greatest 
natural attribute of humans, which is our cognitive functions, namely intelligence. 

For this reason, however, it is better to call humans Homo sapiens instead of Homo 
oeconomicus. 


It is the widespread development of education and investment in science in the 
broadest sense as fully intentional and planned actions that have brought exponential 
growth in civilisational development and prosperity to humanity. They have done so to 
a greater extent than the spontaneous free market process, without detracting 
anything from it. Moreover, man, being an intelligent being who acts consciously, is 
ultimately condemned to act intentionally to a greater extent than spontaneous 
processes, because intentionality, especially with technological development, can 
increasingly harm these processes (including the free market). Man is ultimately 
condemned to an almost fully technologised and created reality, which he will not only 
be able to, but above all have to, correct himself. 


As we know very well, spontaneous processes do not like correction. It can 
paradoxically be said that man, thanks to his intentional nature, is increasingly 
distorting the free market, which is a spontaneous mechanism, and this is an 
irreversible process. Therefore, in the future, we will necessarily have less and less free 
market in the free market (in fact, this is already happening today) and more and more 
technologised creation. Rather, the free market as such will not annihilate, but will 
most likely become a marginal phenomenon. 


The fact that economic processes are highly complex and emergent phenomena, 
difficult or impossible for humans to replicate, does not mean that we must be 
condemned to this process or to its duplication by, for example, artificial intelligence. 
Thanks to our cognitive abilities as beings with sufficiently highly developed 
intelligence, we are able to create substitute processes, often even better from the 
point of view of our utility than the source/natural processes. 


Thanks to air transport, we are able to travel great distances at high speed. This was 
made possible by the aeroplane — the result of human cognitive abilities. Although the 
construction of the aeroplane's components responsible for the lifting force is a major 
simplification of the evolutionary work with which birds have been equipped, the human 
invention beats this evolutionary invention by its utility value (covering great distances 
in a relatively short time). 


The complexity of economic processes, despite their simple idea of a flow of goods and 
services from the producer to the consumer, is largely due, among other things, to the 
complex system of supply chains. This is because the production of goods is currently 
still a multi-stage process, dependent on the cooperation of numerous actors 
specialising in the production of a relatively narrow range of products even within a 
single industry. The production of more complex goods, e.g. an aeroplane or a car, is 
often dispersed over a large geographical area and this inevitably causes major 
logistical challenges, also for the economy. 


The point is that this does not have to be the case in the future, and that the increase 
in the universal manufacturing capacity of individual economic players, together with 
the advances in robotisation and automation, will significantly reduce the supply chain 
and free production processes from logistical nuisances. It should even be stated that 
the more modern the economy is, the more inherently less complex the organisational 
and logistical aspects become, which are the main cause of the complexity and 
emergent nature of its processes. 


This is just one example of how previously considered unsolvable problems are 
becoming solvable thanks to the progress of science and human cognitive abilities. 
Using this analogy, at a high level of generality, one can conclude that these 
regularities apply to virtually all complex issues. The prerequisite for this is, of course, 
that not profit, but science in the broadest sense, with its optimum use thanks to 
intellectual potential, is placed at the centre. 


If we look around carefully, we can see that most things, although obvious, are no 
longer natural to us — general living conditions e.g. housing (buildings instead of caves) 
or food (agricultural cultivation), the settlement of high latitudes, complex medical 
treatments, transport, high technology, computing, artificial intelligence and countless 
aspects related to the development of our civilisation. Along the way, we inevitably 
create new emergent processes even without being fully aware of them, often 
Surpassing in complexity those that are a ‘product’ of nature. A good example of 

this is the aforementioned artificial intelligence, certain aspects of which, related to its 
learning, are a mystery to its creators themselves! 


Extrapolating the above examples to economic issues, the effects will be similar. 

The conundrum is not a question of ‘if’ but 'when'. Keeping all things in proportion to 
the scale of the challenge of harnessing the economy (including globally) through our 
cognitive abilities using new technologies, it is clear that this is not some qualitative 
exception. It is more of a quantitative issue, the solution of which will simply require 
more time in proportion to the other challenges. Besides, an immanent feature of the 
structure of the human psyche is scepticism and a lack of imagination and faith in the 
capabilities of the human mind, which often surprises us, probably because of our 
limited knowledge of it. Man's historical and eternal desire to rise above the earth into 
the air, being a classic example of utopia through the ages, best illustrates this. 


Contrary to various opinions based on the selfish gene and the principle guided by pure 
egoism, man as a very complex structure is also capable of altruistic behaviour in the 
emotional field, and not only at the individual level, but also at the herd level, moreover 
in a systemic manner. Examples of such social behaviour are the tax system or the 
awareness of the common good, and many other more or less abstract attitudes that 
have no counterparts in the natural world. Our level of development also makes it 


possible to understand that the world is a very complex structure and that many of 
these systemic, altruistic behaviours are capable of producing an overall benefit in the 
long term. 


Without the use of cognitive abilities, the economic processes themselves 

(or, if you prefer, the economics of human behaviour in general), in the 
context of civilisational development and well-being, would essentially be a 
zero-sum equation. We can see this in the example of all other species, which, 
deprived of our level of development and only retaining their own 
behaviourism, have not been able to improve their own well-being since the 
beginning of their existence for millions of years. They do not evolve ina 
functional sense as fast as humans, the exception in nature. 


Therefore, we need an approach that is more focused on optimized and maximized use 
of the potential of our cognitive abilities, rather than focusing solely on strictly 
economic and economic solutions. The economy and economics cannot be an end in 
themselves, but one of the means leading to the goal, which should be the 
development of civilisation and human well-being in the broadest sense. Nothing is 
better suited to achieving this goal than our cognitive abilities and the broad 
engagement of science. 


A key principle to understand about the economy is that although the free market is a 
natural and spontaneous phenomenon, it is not compatible with human nature. 

Man, although undoubtedly derived from nature, as a general rule, his behavior and the 
decisions he makes of all kinds, in statistical terms, stand in complete contrast to the 
rest of the species. Being an intelligent being, he is not guided by instincts, but takes 
intentional, i.e. unspontaneous actions. In the economic context, the consequences of 
such functioning are fundamental! This is the key to realizing one of the most 
significant, if not the most significant, cognitive error with regard to an economy 
founded on the free market paradigm. 


This principle reads: The natural asymmetric nature of human actions 
(intentionality), which stands in contrast to the linear nature of economic 
assumptions (predictability of the algorithms that govern these assumptions), 
including the free market, necessitates the need to apply control over certain 
economic processes in a coordinated manner (using technology, emerging 
through science, t.e. the highly developed cognitive functions of man), in order 
to reduce the undesirable inertia that characterises classical economics 
(unpredictability of the negative effects of, among other things, the free 
market). 


Capitalist, feudal or socialist/communist concepts are all more or less irrational and 
oppressive in their own way, and as such are emanations of the culture of different eras 
and human emotions. All these concepts, although strongly antagonised with each 
other, have one thing in common - they are first and foremost ends in themselves, 
focused on the distribution of the final element of the economy, which is the good 
produced, instead of using a holistic and consequently more efficient strategy. 
Therefore, a more fundamental change is needed than at the level of the production of 
goods and their distribution. What is needed is a change at the level of the strategy of 
producing these goods, focusing on the benefits of civilisation. 


Man, as a rational being, possessing in nature the greatest asset necessary for the 
development of the well-being of his species, i.e. intelligence, both individually and 
socially, should primarily focus on the development of civilisation without the use of 
intermediate tools, wasting energy, time and resources. If we focus more exclusively on 
the distribution of wealth and individual gains, the more we will all lose out. 

By failing to make optimal use of intellectual resources already at the level of the 
strategy of producing these goods - analysing their quality, general availability or the 
rationality of using the resources necessary for their production -— we create 
developmental limitations for ourselves as a community. 


If we do not have a proper strategy, we become hostage to economic development, 
environmental degradation, the waste of precious natural resources or the production 
of goods with a deadline, because we have to produce and sell more and more in 
order to guarantee financial profit and employment. In the long run, this is a road to 
nowhere. 


The overriding value should be the development of civilisation as a whole and its 
well-being, because this is simply rational and most profitable for everyone - most 
importantly, also in the long term. If we put the matter this way, it can be seen that all 
the three socio-economic orders mentioned are closer to each other than to a position 
that focuses on intellectual/scientific potential for the sake of the good and interest of 
all. 


Economies focusing on the mere production of goods, their distribution and the profit 
from their sale, will necessarily not be committed to their easy availability, as this will 
clearly conflict with their purpose and interests. 


As living beings and 'consumers' of oxygen, we are not interested in whether the air is 
capitalist, communist or feudal. For humans, the most important value is the very fact 
that it simply is. There is enough of it for everyone and, fortunately, none of the 
above-mentioned socio-economic orders need to involve themselves in its distribution. 
This state of affairs serves everyone, because we can exist peacefully. We do not have 
to pay to consume it as part of a capitalist business licensed to do so. Nor is it 
forbidden to breathe fully under ideological tyranny. And there are also no restrictions 
by virtue of servitude to a feudal who has usurped ownership of all natural goods. 


Of course, air is an example of a good available in unlimited quantity, which is a gift to 
us from nature, but on the other hand it symbolises true, unconditional freedom. 

This example is just a signpost for us in which direction we can and should go. 

For short-term gains of dubious quality for our entire species, it is not worthwhile to 
move towards systems that primarily feed themselves. 


It is in the interest of each of us as well as the community as a whole to use man's 
greatest asset —- reason - in a coordinated, most efficient and optimal way. 


Sylwester Fiet 


OPTIMIZED ECONOMY / THE OPTIMIZED ECONOMY MANIFESTO 


An economic model based 
on the potential of science 


Sylwester Fiet 


2023 



Table of Contents


Chapter 1
The Optimized Economy as an economic model..................................3
1.1 Three levels of the economy.............................................3
1.2 Examples of the use of science in the economy...........................4
1.3 Public sector involvement...............................................6


Chapter 2
Market mechanisms and human nature..........................................7
2.1 Free market versus intentional action...................................7
2.2 The dissonance between classical economics and progress................10


Chapter 3
Synthesis of economic and scientific activities............................12
3.1 Historical stages of welfare creation..................................12
3.2 The key role of intellectual capacity..................................14
3.3 Cognitive errors in assessing the status quo...........................17
3.4 Conclusions and objectives to be pursued...............................20

List of graphics...........................................................22

Annex to Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto...............24 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 3 


Chapter 1 — The Optimized Economy as an economic model 


1.1 Three levels of the economy 


The economy, due to the fundamental role material goods play in human life, both 
individually and socially, is a key element of human civilisation. 


The most important link in the economy is not the property relations, even though 
they are the ones that, for historical reasons and human nature, evoke the most 
emotion and thus focus the most attention on themselves, but the broader strategy of 
producing material goods. 


Meanwhile, the economy over the course of history has become hostage to property 
relations and the associated numerous, ideologised disputes over economic systems 
(including private property versus state property) and economics as such, often 
becoming an irrational and inefficient means to an end, and sometimes even an end in 
itself, which should be the development of civilisation and the well-being of the human 
species. 


It is an appropriate, i.e. optimized and thus effective strategy of producing 
goods based on intellectual potential, or more precisely on broadly 
understood science: research and development activities, new technologies 
and investments in these aspects — with a special role of the public sector in 
this respect, also in the context of creating new economic entities — and 
taking into account rationality, social needs, availability of natural resources, 
environmental conditions or, finally, the very quality of produced goods, that 
should be the main driving force and the key to achieving prosperity and 
civilisational success. It is at this level/stage of the economy (LEVEL II in the 
graphic below) that the greatest opportunities are found. 




____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 4 


Graphic 1 — Three levels/stages of the economy 

Link to graphic 1 in PNG format:
https://ia903408.us.archive.org/17/items/graphic-3-comparison-of-two-layouts-optimized-economy/graphic-1-three-levels-of-the-economy-optimized-economy.png

Link to graphic 1 in SVG format:
https://ia800702.us.archive.org/19/items/graphic-1-three-levels-of-the-economy-optimized-economy/graphic-1-three-levels-of-the-economy-optimized-economy.svg

Text description of graphic 1:
(Graphic 1 — Three levels/stages of the economy)

————
————

LEVEL III
The system of the material goods distribution | Feudal economy | Capitalist economy | Socialist economy

——

LEVEL II
The strategy of the material goods production | Optimized production of material goods, taking into account their quality, social needs and general civilisation development with a maximized involvement of intellectual potential    

——

LEVEL I
The ability to production material goods | The skill of processing natural resources into material goods

==

Basic levels/stages of the economy, which is a key element in the development of human civilisation




State involvement in such processes is important not only from the point of view of 
organisational and financial capacity, but also because of institutional, scientific and 
educational potential. However, it is important that such projects are carried out both 
by state actors at central and regional level and by private actors, as well as through 
cooperation and public-private partnerships. 


More important than the forms of cooperation in the implementation of these projects 
is the development of an appropriate culture in society and sustainable and good 
standards for the symbiosis of economy and science, not focused solely on a quick 
return and short-term financial gain, but maximising the effectiveness in achieving the 
overall benefits of civilisation. 


1.2 Examples of the use of science in the economy 


The science-based economy is not an abstract project, but a proven method in, 
among others, South Korea, where a great leap in technology and civilisation has 
been achieved through the use of a number of innovative projects, implemented in 
the country's economy. Although the methods used in this case themselves can be 
debated, in principle, South Korea is a practical example, taking the right direction. 


Another very tangible and symptomatic example of the tangible benefits of directly 
applying scientific processes to the economy, permanently changing the standard of 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 5 


living of societies and every individual, was the Manhattan Project. This historic 
project had an enormous impact on the reality after the Second World War, giving the 
world global peace for many decades. Despite its partly destructive nature, it also 
contributed to a major technological leap in civil nuclear power and the energy sector 
as a whole, with an impact on the efficiency of the entire economy that is difficult to 
overestimate. 


This example makes it perfectly clear that the economy alone is not the tool to 
guarantee the best pace of civilisational development, using market systems alone, 
despite the intellectual potential that man possesses which is necessary for this. 
Market mechanisms on their own are not capable of perceiving and, above all, 
realising undertakings with such potential. The free market process, for objective 
reasons and its natural limitations — including financial constraints - operates on the 
basis of a simple algorithm of the law of supply and demand. It is therefore 
characterised by its rather limited scope and the environment in which it operates. 
This phenomenon does not only apply to projects on such a large scale, but also to 
projects of greater complexity than those it handles on a daily basis. 


The Apollo Programme, responsible for the landing of man on the moon, can be taken 
as another example, which resulted in the creation or modernisation of many 
technologies already in place and subsequently used in various industries. 


The graphic below illustrates the advantage of economic investment using a scientific 
base over the classic model, which is geared solely towards a quick rate of return. 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 6 


Graphic 2 — Comparison of two investment models 

Link to graphic 2 in PNG format:
https://ia903408.us.archive.org/17/items/graphic-3-comparison-of-two-layouts-optimized-economy/graphic-2-comparison-of-two-investment-models-optimized-economy.png

Link to graphic 2 in SVG format:
https://ia800702.us.archive.org/19/items/graphic-1-three-levels-of-the-economy-optimized-economy/graphic-2-comparison-of-two-investment-models-optimized-economy.svg

Text description of graphic 2:
(Graphic 2 — Comparison of two investment models)

————
————

General civilisation benefits plus rate of return

——

Graph of the classic investment model (graph in black)

——

Graph of the investment model based on scientific potential (graph in red)

——

Time

==

An indicative comparison of two investment models using graphs, showing the benefits achieved over time




1.3 Public sector involvement 


Certainly, in constructing a science-based model, there is a need to strike the right 
balance between the fundamental issue of responsibility for the general good and the 
public sector and the economic freedom of the private sector, while maintaining 
cooperation and dialogue between all parties and social control over these processes 
in the spirit of democracy and respect for the human rights of the individual and 
society. There is also a need for systemic and comprehensive solutions to successively 
increase the involvement of science in the economy on a scale many times greater 
than is currently the case, as well as multidimensional public sector participation in 
this regard. 


Public and private property operate in a dichotomy, complementing each other. 
They reflect well human nature, which needs different characteristics of activity, 
including at the behavioural level, where there is a balance between herd and 
individual activity. However, it is worth bearing in mind that in an increasingly 
complex world, ownership as such can take on a character beyond the classical 
models. 


In addition to the competitive element, the collaborative element is equally 
important. It is optimal when the synthesis of all types of activities 
ultimately results not in their collision but in their synergy. 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 7 


Contrary to intuition, in addition to strictly humanistic reasons, such a model also has 
a very tangible and practical justification. In the long term, it benefits everyone, 
because the world we live in is a system of interconnected vessels with a tendency to 
deepen all interdependencies, and new technologies and scientific achievements, 
spread globally and permanently improve living standards. 


It should be borne in mind that economic freedom is a very important element in the 
context of the implementation of creative and scientific processes, giving freedom and 
independence of action. On the other hand, processes initiated by the public sector or 
public-private partnerships may guarantee increased competitiveness in achieving not 
only better financial results, but, above all, by forcing an increase in the standards 
and quality of the final results obtained, translating directly into civilisational 
development in its entire spectrum, and thus into the optimal development 

and well-being of the entire, human population. 


Chapter 2 — Market mechanisms and human nature 


2.1 Free market versus intentional action 


An inherent, essential and natural part of the economy has almost always been the 
free market, in which goods are exchanged through voluntary transactions between 
interested parties. 


There is also no doubt that this essentially simple algorithm based on the law of 
supply and demand has played a great role in the history of mankind and positively 
influenced the development of civilisation. The free market brings with it valuable 
values such as freedom, creativity, stimulation for entrepreneurship and many 
motivational factors. However, it is above all what people make it. 


Like most natural mechanisms, it is burdened with a high degree of inertia. 

Its reactivity, especially in an environment of human behaviourism, based on very 
different laws to this simple algorithm, paradoxically makes its natural origin, no 
longer an advantage. 


In order to realise the gravity of the implications of the elementary difference 
separating man from the rest of reality, even though he is an integral part of it, it 
suffices to observe man comparatively with the rest of the natural world and the 
phenomena or entire physical systems occurring in nature with particular reference to 
their fundamental division into behaviour. 


Human intentional action is the key to understanding the whole issue, as it is 
the factor that can overturn all the assumptions and theoretical models of 
various mechanisms, including the free market. 


Intentionality, which is characterised by a high degree of unpredictability and 
resistance to statistics, apart from human behaviour, is essentially a phenomenon 
that does not occur in nature. Ignoring this phenomenon of nature, if only from a 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 8 


mathematical point of view, necessarily has to be fraught with consequences and 
often becomes a prime cause of subsequent misunderstandings. It can even be the 
source of a domino effect of many cognitive errors, among others, in fields dealing 
with economics. 


The issues described here should not be combined and confused with the concept of 
entropy, which in nature balances ordered states. Economic processes and human 
interactions with them are local phenomena, characterised by very unrepresentative 
properties and relations with respect to a general account of the law of entropy, as 
well as the associated second law of thermodynamics. 


Human behaviour based on intentional action is basically the opposite of the 
behaviour of other systems, which are characterised by spontaneity and lack of order, 
or the mere randomness of events. Furthermore, there are many downplayed but 
fundamental elements that distinguish human behaviour from the animal world, 
although certain similarities tempt us to make comparisons with it. 


Somewhat simplistically, the animal world functions through instincts, which can be 
compared to more or less complex but reasonably predictable algorithms. 

Human activity, on the other hand, is a conglomeration of many complex elements: 
logical thinking, highly structured actions, abstract thinking, complex emotions and 
intentional actions, characterised in their general trend by a high coefficient of 
unpredictability. 


These are factors that are so radically different from the rest of organisms that, with 
their characteristics and consequences, they go far beyond strictly biological criteria, 
making their mark far more strongly than one might think, right down to the level of 
physical systems. 


This is why humans evolve so quickly in their behaviour, unlike animals, in all spheres 
of life. The domain of the economy is no exception. Unlike the animal world, it is not 
based solely on natural law, but also operates in an environment of legislated law, 
which is unprecedented in the natural world and the behaviour of herd species. 


This is important information, and tells us a lot about human nature, which has 
emancipated itself from the rest of nature to such an extent that it has produced 
something like its own operating system. This does not apply only to law, but to all 
human activity. Human nature turned out to be so complex that natural mechanisms 
were no longer sufficient and man was forced to produce a new framework for his 
species, encompassing his functioning in reality. Moreover, other natural mechanisms, 
including the free market, were able to function better precisely because of legislated 
law. 


Since in the domain of law, the natural must have recognised the primacy of state 
law, by analogy, it is reasonable to argue that in the field of economic activity it must 
be similar. It turned out that the human environment, characterised by intentional 
behaviour, the reactive mechanism of the law of supply and demand can become a 
negative tool in the hands of a conscious being. Therefore, it must operate on the 
basis of legislated law, and therefore a mechanism devoid of reactive characteristics. 


Consequently, the obvious conclusion should be that man must also strive to develop 
the economic mechanisms themselves with a degree of complexity in their structure 
and adequate standards to accommodate the high degree of complexity of the 
environment they are to serve. 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 9 


In an increasingly complex yet globalised world, it is becoming clear that the economy 
is a system of interconnected vessels, interacting ever more strongly with each other, 
especially as it serves the closed environment that is our planet. It could be argued 
that it is beginning to interact with itself, as it naturally exhausts its diversity of 
ownership of individual economic players and new areas of market expansion. It also 
loses competitiveness. 


In addition to this, certain self-destructive processes can be observed, geared solely 
towards commercial objectives that have nothing to do with meeting social needs. 
Pressure is being exerted on the political class to delegitimise various aspects of our 
lives under the pretext of concern for people's health or environmental protection just 
to create space for new investments. Although pathological, this is at the same time a 
natural process of many actors following the principle of acting along the line of least 
resistance and economic cost. To some extent, in its structure, it resembles 
autoimmune diseases. 


This phenomenon is further reinforced by the natural process, which has been going 
on for many decades and even generations, of the expansion of capital and the 
emergence of ever larger entities, up to the size of today's corporate giants. It is not 
difficult to see that what was once intended to serve competitiveness now 
paradoxically contributes to trends that monopolise the market. Another paradox is 
that what, thanks to the free market, was supposed to regulate itself automatically, 
had to be corrected with the help of, antitrust institutions, i.e. by state 
interventionism. 


In spite of antitrust action, the market manifests a natural tendency towards the 
formation of large players and, in some industries, even cartels. With the help of 
legislation, more and more antitrust prohibitions can be created, but human creativity 
will be able to circumvent them in one way or another. These phenomena, in the 
human environment, are inevitable, because man, as a creature acting intentionally 
and consciously, and therefore acting actively, will always achieve an advantage over 
the simple and reactive algorithm of the law of supply and demand. These processes 
settle not so much at the economic, social or biological level, but at a more 
elementary level - at the level of physical layouts/systems that can be described in 
the language of mathematics. 


The graphic below illustrates the difference between events occurring at random and 
intentional, human-specific action. 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 10 


Graphic 3 — Comparison of two layouts 

Link to graphic 3 in PNG format:
https://archive.org/download/graphic-3-comparison-of-two-layouts-optimized-economy/graphic-3-comparison-of-two-layouts-optimized-economy.png

Link to graphic 3 in SVG format:
https://ia800702.us.archive.org/19/items/graphic-1-three-levels-of-the-economy-optimized-economy/graphic-3-comparison-of-two-layouts-optimized-economy.svg

Text description of graphic 3:
(Graphic 3 — Comparison of two layouts)

————
————

BOARD A | BOARD B

——

BOARD A shows the arrangement of a randomly genereted distribution of 16 circles on a board consisting of 100 fields. Such a layout is statistically characterized by a fairly even distribution of circles on the board, as well as a similar number of circles in each of its quarters. Due to this uniformity in its general trend, it is much more predictable than the intentional arrangement visible on BOARD B.    

==

Comparison of a random layout with an intentional layout characteristic of man




In a very similar way, intentional human action shapes processes related to the 
financial side of the economy and the ubiquitous paradigm of financial profit, mainly 
based on a quick rate of return. 


Centuries ago, when the role of science and its impact on economic and civilisational 
development was severely limited, it was not as important as it is today. In modern 
times, the role of science in the economy began to grow rapidly. Over time, its impact 
on financial returns has clearly become significant. 


2.2 The dissonance between classical economics and progress 


As in many systems in which the goals of different elements of a larger whole 
sometimes cease to coincide, it has become apparent that, paradoxically, the 
development of science can stand in the way of the economy's central imperative of 
financial profit. Moreover, it can threaten entire industries. Thus, a turning point was 
reached where the economy began to live its own life. It gradually ceased to play its 
role as the main engine of civilisation, seeing science as a threatening competitor. 


Since then, it is science that has become synonymous with development and a direct 
tool for obtaining human well-being in the broadest sense and the main means of 
achieving overall absolute benefits on a macro scale, i.e. so universal as to be 
relevant to the interests of every individual — new technologies, medicines, vaccines, 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 11 


etc. Economics, on the other hand, has come to be primarily a source of providing 
relative benefits, i.e. mainly profits estimated in the relationship of a person or 
economic entity to other persons and entities - measured primarily by the criteria of 
financial gains. 


Economic processes obviously continue to support the scientific ones, contributing to 
the overall development of civilisation, as long as they do not interfere with the 
former's main priority — financial profit. This is why a paradigm shift by replacing the 
economic imperative with the scientific one is so crucial. 


Financial economics is a good example of how an economy left largely to spontaneous 
mechanisms starts to split internally into different factions, further creating internal 
structural contradictions and damaging processes. Not only socially, but also 
economically. We often hear criticism of financial economics, which has emancipated 
itself from economic processes to such an extent that it has become a new branch of 
the economy, even though it does not actually produce any goods itself. It gives the 
impression of being a cancer created by the organism on which it parasitizes. 


However, along with the criticism, there is no in-depth reflection that this is in fact a 
natural process of the classical economic model, exploiting its inertial nature. 

The comments usually amount to criticism of the ethical attitudes of other people or 
the political class, with an uncritical attitude towards the very nature of the model. 
In part, this is probably a typical psychological regularity, characterised by people 
treating the status quo with sufficiently long tenure as a natural state. 

Mechanisms operating long enough in the human environment become naturally 
axiomatised, becoming immune not only to their contestation but even to in-depth 
analysis. 


Similar processes form throughout an economy heavily based on inertial mechanism. 
The whole system begins to function autonomously, subject to spontaneous 
processes, not necessarily always beneficial to man. What was supposed to be a 
source of many solutions for man becomes his trap and begins to be unfettered 
freedom for the system itself and the pathological phenomena that often accompany 
it. 


Generated, socially harmful phenomena in free market processes most often become 
a challenge for state governments. In order to eliminate or offset them, central 
authorities are forced to implement various regulations, which in turn conflict with 
free market principles. This creates a negative feedback loop from which there is no 
good way out. 


Any compromises in this area tend to become only ad hoc half-measures. There is no 
good synergy between one element and the other — the free market and regulation — 
because they are incompatible processes. The first element is a spontaneous and 
chaotic process, while the nature of the second is characterised by a high degree of 
orderliness. Worst of all, however, is the fact that the incompatibility, and often the 
dissimilarity of the objectives of the two, does not merely manifest itself in a lack of 
cooperation, but in a mutual collision. 


Solutions that focus on the systemic use of scientific potential are those that will make 
a major contribution to the successive levelling out of the described conflict. 

Over time, they can eliminate this disharmony, replacing these phenomena with their 
own processes with positive results for all. Scientific potential, by virtue of its 
universal nature, can combine creative and orderly elements. 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 12 


The scientific element will make it possible to free oneself from the unstable nature of 
economic processes operating in a strongly inertial environment. It is not about 
permanent human control of all processes, but about the elementary agency of 
human activities related to development in the broadest sense, supported by stability, 
a rational degree of order and an increase in its efficiency. 


Chapter 3 — Synthesis of economic and scientific activities 


3.1 Historical stages of welfare creation 


Since prehistoric times, man has engaged in various activities to improve his material 
situation and general well-being. In different eras, different activities functioned as 
main or accompanying activities, ranging from a hunter-gatherer society through 
agriculture, to an era in which trade flourished with the development of civilisation, to 
modern times with the Industrial Revolution and widespread industrialisation. 

What they have in common is the extensive economy and management of natural 
resources. 


Each of these eras has left its mark on human civilisation. Some did so less, others to 
a greater extent. Some activities have been replaced by others, and still others have 
remained with us to this day. 


If we analyse today's times and look at human activity, its characteristics, 
habits, mental sphere, the priorities set to improve our well-being, etc., we 
can see that mentally we are strongly linked to the paradigms of commercial 
activity. We can therefore conclude that we are still strongly influenced by 
merchant culture, being more or less aware of this fact. 


On the one hand, we are aware of the power of science, but on the other, we 
are more attached to mercantile solutions, as we have mainly been shaped 
by them. 


Another common feature of the activities mentioned is their unreliability, 
transience, and the fact that they are being replaced by those of greater 
complexity and involvement of intellectual potential. We conclude that they 
do not represent universal solutions, but are merely the product of our 
intellect, representing a certain level at a certain time, just like the whole 
development of civilisation. 


Just as at the time of the transition between the feudal system and free market 
capitalism, it was hard for many people to realise that there could be any better world 
order than the monarchy with its hierarchical structure, so today we fall into an 
analogous cognitive trap, axiomatically recognising one or another current model as 
non-alternative and being the best possible guarantor of prosperity and civilisational 
development. 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 13 


Meanwhile, we are dealing with the opposite process, in which our cognitive functions 
play a central role. They are the source giving rise to different eras, social, economic 
and political orders and, most significantly, technological ones. 


From historical examples, we can observe quite close correlations between openness 
to cognitive processes: educational, exploratory or related to the exchange of 
information between different cultural circles and faster civilisational development. 

It was, among other things, the great geographical discoveries at the end of the 15th 
century that provided a huge developmental impulse and a milestone towards the 
Renaissance and the flowering of many fields, including science, and then the Age of 
Enlightenment. 


It is very difficult to imagine the social, philosophical, political, economic, 
scientific, technological and, above all, mental changes in the Age of 
Enlightenment without the influence of the Renaissance on the development 
of Europe. Furthermore, it is above all thanks to this cause-and-effect 
relationship that the idea of liberalism, free-market capitalism or the 
Industrial Revolution could have emerged. This cause-and-effect relationship 
is incomparably more important than the direct correlation between free 
market capitalism and the Industrial Revolution. 


While the link between free market capitalism and the Industrial Revolution 
is natural, the more significant and necessary condition for the emergence of 
both and each separately was the fundamental intellectual change that had 
previously taken place in European society and the Western world as a 
whole. 


The free market of the 18th and 19th centuries therefore did not arise in isolation 
from reality, but was a natural consequence of earlier processes. 


Various forms of capitalism arose much earlier, as early as the 13th and 14th 
centuries in Italy and even in ancient times. However, they did not record such a 
development as the capitalism of the nineteenth century for various reasons, but 
above all because they lacked a sufficiently high technological level, which, thanks to 
the development of science, could only materialise five hundred years later in the 
form of the Industrial Revolution. 


Therefore, the main cause and source of development in the broadest sense of the 
term and the methods for creating wealth should not be sought in such or such a 
different economic system, but in man's natural creative abilities and the creation of 
optimal conditions for their maximum possible use. Of course, models may differ in 
their effectiveness in unleashing human intellectual potential, but as a general rule, 
the source of progress remains the cognitive functions with which nature has endowed 
us through evolution. 


Merchant culture was so firmly entrenched in human consciousness that even the rival 
economic systems of the 20th century — capitalism and socialism/communism - 
despite their many differences, were strongly influenced by it, basing their doctrines 
on the production of goods without much reflection on the exploitation of natural 
resources, environmental or social factors or the overall strategy of their production in 
the context of optimising civilisational development. In the case of communist states, 
the role of merchant/trader was played by their authoritarian central authorities. 


As a species, however, we tend to overestimate the status quo, which we have often 
mischaracterised throughout history as the end state, or even the perfect state. 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 14 


The reason for this is probably a lack of sufficient cognitive capacity and anticipation 
beyond our own era. Although, when viewed from a statistical point of view and 
historical experience, the belief in the uniqueness of one's own era and the 
universality of the characteristics of the various elements within it is unlikely and very 
naive. 


Of course, new solutions are not always the right ones. Examples from history in the 
form of communism or fascism best demonstrate this. However, the nature of 
pathological cases reveals its face quite quickly. Fascism, as a caricature of the state 
and republicanism, and communism, as a caricature of community, social solidarity 
and constructive socialist demands, appeared already in their beginnings as 
phenomena of suspicion and horror. Their bloody totalitarianisms, brutally combating 
all expressions of freedom, became the ultimate confirmation of this. 


3.2 The key role of intellectual capacity 


The only element, distinguished by universal characteristics, that we can 
observe in these processes is the human intellect. It is the human cognitive 
function that is the true engine of progress, which nothing else has been able 
to replace so far, and certainly not this simple algorithm of the law of supply 
and demand. Lessons from history should be learned, no less, nowadays, 
science should be our natural choice as a means of achieving our goals, 
especially as the existing ones in the form of the classical economy are 
increasingly starting to fail and generate negativity. 


Naturally, pathological economic mechanisms have an impact on very practical 
aspects affecting each of us: the use of cheaper components for products such as cars 
at the expense of human safety, the planned mass ageing of products by most 
manufacturers, price collusion, or the mass production of unhealthy, highly processed 
food. These examples are just a drop in the ocean of all phenomena in the market. 
These are not extreme cases, but rules applied by economic operators. 


There are many examples of pathological behaviour in the market that are derived 
from human actions, but which the free market alone cannot prevent. It is possible to 
envisage a situation where several powerful players in the market, who should 
theoretically be competing with each other, will in reality be more inclined towards 
tacit cooperation or at least mutual neutrality. 


This is because these players are human beings —- conscious, intentional beings, 
limited by their own behaviourism —- who make calculations. They may come to the 
conclusion that, from a certain point onwards, it will be more comfortable for them to 
maintain their position in the market, and that an assurance action is more beneficial, 
providing a sense of stability and security as opposed to risky competition and the 
uncertainty that comes with it. 


The entry of new players into the market in such a situation more often ends in 
theoretical considerations than in practice. Examples are sometimes given of powerful 
new companies in the IT industry, among others, which until recently were 
insignificant players. At the same time, it is forgotten that the IT domain is a 
relatively young industry and has already been dominated by a few, which only 
confirms the general trend towards monopolisation in the market. 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 15 


Large economic players exploiting their position and power in the market are also 
becoming a threat to freedom and democracy more broadly. 


One can be critical of this state of affairs, or one can look at it realistically and 
conclude that it is an immanent and natural feature of the market, occurring 
according to the principle that if it is possible to achieve a superior goal through the 
path of least resistance, this is the path that will be taken. It is possible to defend and 
explain such processes with arguments of economic viability, or even social benefits, 
associated with the labour market. However, this will always just be a defence of the 
irrational status quo while ignoring the attempt to apply any alternative. 


It is always the case that major changes bring side effects and accompanying social 
unrest, but we cannot stop the inevitable processes, led by the robotisation and 
automation of many industries. It would even be detrimental to do so. On the other 
hand, avoiding solving problems in advance, which will happen anyway, is all the 
more irrational. 


Such phenomena on a broader scale result in the economy taking two steps forward 
and one step backwards in the context of civilisation. The point is that all steps should 
be steps taken forward. 


If a comparison is made between a model in which an entity makes an investment 
with a greater commitment to scientific potential in the development of, for example, 
medicine, rather than an investment geared towards a quick rate of return, it will 
most often become apparent that the former investment model will be more 
favourable to the entity in the long term. The credibility of the entity will also become 
an important factor. The price will be a longer time to wait for the final result, but the 
bonus of using scientific solutions will bring disproportionately greater economic, but 
also civilisational benefits compared to the classical model. 


The values derived from such a model, also on a wider scale, will prove to be 
disproportionately greater for all than in the traditional model, the more they are 
implemented en masse and in many domains simultaneously. The scientific factor is 
many times a more effective means of arriving at more advanced and satisfying 
solutions and overall well-being in all aspects of our lives than the traditional model, 
which aims almost exclusively at financial gain. 


The economic model supported by scientific achievements is so effective that it will 
ultimately prove to be more beneficial even to wealthy individuals, as the increased 
quality of human existence on a macro scale will surpass that achieved by classical 
methods and financial engineering by the large market players. 


It is not difficult to imagine many examples of this type, where, for example, a newly 
developed cure for a hitherto incurable disease, the general level of medicine, new 
technologies to facilitate a comfortable life, or the production of healthy food and a 
general increase in quality of life using a science-supported model, will be 
incomparably more important to these people than the financial fortunes gained with 
which goods can be acquired, but of limited capacity and quality. 


The quick rate of return and the culture associated with the classic model, the mental 
issues and the business decisions taken, although short-sighted, may seem more 
attractive and safer for business ventures. Much, therefore, depends on the 
successive implementation of comprehensive systemic solutions, statutory legal 
regulations — e.g. liberalisation of patent law — social issues, while activation, 
motivation and support mechanisms from the public sector at all levels. 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 16 


Multidimensional cooperation at the international level, while respecting the sovereign 
decisions of all political actors, is also desirable. 


There is a need for serious public sector participation in these processes, both from 
the scientific and logistical base, as well as from the many complex economic 
activities linking many industries. Finally, a lot of information, organisational and also 
educational work is needed on the culture of exploiting scientific potential and the 
many sociological aspects in this area. 


When creating an adequate research base, particular care should be taken to create 
motivational factors. In addition to various financial aspects such as offers of 
preferential loans for this type of activity or taxation of large economic entities, 
attractive conditions must be created for better quality and faster career development 
of scientific personnel. 


The activity of the public sector, in cooperation with private entities, should 
become a very important factor in the form of competitiveness in relation to 
the rest of the market in the production of goods and services in the context 
of their civilisational values, and not only commercial ones. Over time, 
science-based projects will, thanks to their efficiency, also start to 
compensate for the investment costs associated with the slower rate of 
return and the problems inherent in processes at an early stage of their 
development, compared to the classic model. 


With the right organisation and synergies between the various economic 
activities and the scientific base, these ventures will be able to positively 
address the financing of their own ongoing development at an increasingly 
rapid pace. 


In very many cases, it is not so much the specific amount of investment that matters 
as the methodology used. It is very important to make optimum use of the creative 
factor, and not just the reproductive one, at man's disposal, and to replace quantity 
with quality in action. It is, after all, reason that is the greatest attribute of our 
species, not coincidentally called Homo Sapiens by ourselves, which should oblige 
humanity all the more strongly to use it effectively. 


Such a model will better benefit both the individual and the public, across the 
spectrum of quality of life. This is supported by the rationality implicit in the 
effectiveness of scientific solutions and the stability implicit in the more 
structured nature of this model. 


The graphic below indicatively shows how, over the centuries, science, thanks to 
man's natural cognitive functions, in addition to strictly economic activities, has 
gained increasing influence on the development of civilisation over the last 
millennium. 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 17 


Graphic 4 — Impact of economy and science on the development 
of civilisation 

Link to graphic 4 in PNG format:
https://ia803408.us.archive.org/17/items/graphic-3-comparison-of-two-layouts-optimized-economy/graphic-4-impact-of-economy-and-science-on-the-development-of-civilisation-optimized-economy.png

Link to graphic 4 in SVG format:
https://ia800702.us.archive.org/19/items/graphic-1-three-levels-of-the-economy-optimized-economy/graphic-4-impact-of-economy-and-science-on-the-development-of-civilisation-optimized-economy.svg

Text description of graphic 4:
(Graphic 4 — Impact of economy and science on the development of civilisation)

————
————

Graph showing the impact of economic activity on the development of civilisation (graph in black)

——

Graph showing the impact of scienceon the development of civilisation (graph in red)

——

1000   1100   1200   1300   1400   1500   1600   1700   1800   1900   2000

==

An indicative graphs showing the impact of economy and science on the development of civilisation in the last millennium




3.3 Cognitive errors in assessing the status quo 


The production of added value in economic processes gives a sense of continuous 
progress, overshadowing the powerful human capabilities that can already be 
achieved through creative processes, which are not being given good enough 
conditions to realise their full potential. An economy based on maximising this 
potential and applying systemic solutions to it will create an entirely new quality. 


One of the problems standing in the way of seeing these possibilities is limited human 
perception. Man's lifespan is so relatively short that he does not notice processes that 
are happening all the time. At least not to the extent they deserve, misjudging many 
mechanisms as unchangeable and universal, as if they were linear. 


Usually, human attention is attracted to single elements that belong to a larger whole. 
If they are locally beneficial, they are unlikely to provide the impetus for a deeper 
analysis of their nature or synthesis. On the contrary, they will reinforce habits and 
reinforce the belief that there are no better alternatives to them. 


One can compare this situation to the problem associated with observing the 
curvature of the Earth. No one pays any attention to such a fact, especially as it is 
imperceptible on the scale on which we operate. Nonetheless, we are aware of how 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 18 


important it is as a factor that makes our existence possible at all. Human perception 
resembles a situation with two straight lines and a minimum angle between them, 
which locally will be of no interest. 


This state of affairs will produce a false sense of consistency between theoretical 
assumptions and practice. However, this is only until the consequences associated 
with the global scale begin to make themselves strongly felt. An analogous situation 
applies to human perception, habits and illusions associated with classical economic 
processes. In this case, the realisation of significant inconsistencies can be quite a 
long process. 


Meanwhile, the processes regarding the capabilities of the world of science, 
are not only occurring at a rapid pace, but are progressing exponentially, 
increasing their still untapped value. 


The vast majority of the negative processes that emerged in the economy were the 
inevitable order of things and, contrary to popular opinion, it turned out that the 
overriding objective of the economy was never really the achievement of general 
well-being for the population as a whole, but the financial profit of a specific entity, 
preferably with a quick rate of return. The goal of achieving general prosperity was 
and still is necessarily only an accompanying objective. 


Although, in such cases, a large percentage of the population may still be convinced 
otherwise and, through the power of habit and suggestion, go through a kind of 
process of denial, eventually, sooner or later, a logical fact must reach people's 
consciousness: the path between the intention (the goal set) and the 
attainment of a goal of the best possible quality, is the more efficient and 
shorter the fewer intermediate elements there are on it. 


This universal principle also applies to all economic processes, concerning, among 
other things, the entire process of material goods/products. In the classical economic 
model, this intermediate element is burdened with an overriding objective in the form 
of financial profit, which may or may not be strictly correlated with the optimal 
achievement of the objective. Moreover, it may even be in conflict with it. 


Ideally, there should be no intermediate elements at all, as illustrated in the graphic 
below. 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 19 


Graphic 5 — Process with and without intermediate element 

Link to graphic 5 in PNG format:
https://ia803408.us.archive.org/17/items/graphic-3-comparison-of-two-layouts-optimized-economy/graphic-5-process-with-and-without-intermediate-element-optimized-economy.png

Link to graphic 5 in SVG format:
https://ia800702.us.archive.org/19/items/graphic-1-three-levels-of-the-economy-optimized-economy/graphic-5-process-with-and-without-intermediate-element-optimized-economy.svg

Text description of graphic 5:
(Graphic 5 – Process with and without intermediate element)

————
————

Intention | An intermediate element that can e.g. modify the nature of motivation in the ongoing process, and thus influence the quality of the achieved goal | Goal    

——

Intention | Goal

==

The difference between a process with an intermediate element and a process without an intermediate element




The more and more tools — economic actors - man has at his disposal, the remedial 
mechanisms naturally attributed to the free market become more and more limited. 
This is why, centuries ago and even a few decades ago, it was possible to overlook 
various risks. Although the mechanism of the free market is immutable, it operates in 
a permanently changing human environment, which is gaining an ever-increasing 
advantage over this mechanism at an exponential rate. 


The crux of the issue, then, lies not in the free market as such, but in the 
unwillingness to accept that this mechanism is increasingly unable to live up to its role 
in the surrounding reality. As with the abacus in the computer age, the problem lies 
not in the inaccuracy of this tool, but in its lack of functionality and efficiency. 


Interventionism, on the other hand, has acquired a bad name, whereas in reality it is 
nothing more than an intentional human action which, depending on the context, can 
be either a positive or negative phenomenon or simply neutral. And as such, in 
isolation from other human actions, it does not constitute a concrete mechanism or 
system. 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 20 


3.4 Conclusions and objectives to be pursued 


As conscious beings with a sense of responsibility for ourselves and our species as a 
whole, we are largely, or even mostly, condemned to intentional actions, which 
require the development of a range of optimized and effectively functioning processes, 
proceedings and behaviours, including in the economic domain. Not only those 
directly derived from our intellect, but also from scientific and technological advances, 
such as artificial intelligence. There is also a need to implement solutions of an 
interdisciplinary nature, not only for the individual, but also for entire groups of 
economic actors, complementing each other and cooperating under the auspices of a 
single management. 


Due to the nature of such a model, it is impossible to speak of any specific key on 
which it would be based. It will certainly not be a specific mechanism/algorithm, but, 
as in the case of statute law, an elaborated whole set of legal, social, sociological or 
motivational aspects, exploiting the creative nature of man, constantly subject to 
adjustments, taking into account the changing nature of the human environment over 
time. 


Negative motivation schemes are quite ineffective. The shameful and inhumane 
examples from ancient and modern history using slave systems are proof of this. 
Schemes based on purely reproductive activity are also less effective than creative 
activity, because in the case of the dear one we have a strong correlation with an 
anthropological factor, specific to humans, related to the cognitive functions to which 
we owe our evolutionary success in general. 


In this field, human beings are particularly and naturally active, even in the absence 
of additional motivational factors. Reinforcement with additional motivation by 
creating appropriate conditions for the use of these activities, especially among 
intellectually outstanding but also average individuals, will contribute all the more to 
greater achievements in the scientific field, and thus to the emergence of new 
technologies and a more efficient economy. 


Many ideas that mankind had previously rejected as unrealistic or for mental reasons, 
cultural prejudices or habits, were put into practice after a while anyway. Often out of 
compulsion rather than goodwill. This is how we approached, among other things, the 
concept of universal education, including women's education or, finally, a system of 
governance based on democracy. As a consequence, these proved not only viable, but 
indispensable. 


It is no different today, when we are increasingly condemned to make concrete 
decisions, not leaving things to their own devices, if only in the context of acquiring 
new energy sources. The natural resources we possess are not part of a theoretical 
model with infinite parameters, but their quantity is defined by specific numbers. 


Their depletion will sooner or later force us to take specific, targeted action, before 
economic operators decide to use other resources, cheaper to obtain, but not 
necessarily beneficial or profitable in the long term from the point of view of the 
consumer, or with a negative impact on the environment and humans themselves. 


The economy and its closely related quality and lifestyle also have a huge impact not 
only on the individual, but on society as a whole. The consequences of this in turn 
have a great impact on a myriad of social phenomena. One of these is the 
consequences for the demographic structure. Market mechanisms often have 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 21 


disastrous and irreversible effects on many of these aspects, but solving the problems 
they generate is most often left to the intervention of the authorities. 


It is common to trivialise and shallow these issues, shifting various problems to the 
next generation. Social problems induce difficulties with the economic situation, thus 
closing the cycle of consequences caused by the spontaneous nature of classical 
market processes. 


The more we deal with economic mechanisms of an inertial nature, such as the 
classical economic model, the more it is impossible to predict and estimate all their 
real costs. 


A strange paradox therefore occurs. In a world dominated by reckoning with economic 
costs at every turn, no account is taken of the calculation of gains and losses brought 
about by the very use of such an economic criterion. This is often argued on the basis 
of the lack of such possibilities, which only confirms the lack of justification for the 
belief that there is no alternative to this state of affairs, even though, in fact, we all 
increasingly recognise the growing limitations and declining efficiency of the classical 
model. 


Such a belief, as in most cases, stems from a psychological factor and the strength of 
attachment to the status quo. This is one of the classic examples of form over 
substance and habit over rationality. 


Problems of this type are increasing exponentially in a globalised world. 

Already today, free market processes alone cannot handle our reality, and the area of 
their possibilities is shrinking drastically. To all this must be added the protectionist 
economic policies of various countries and the disturbing phenomena associated with 
the announced attempts by authoritarian states to implement grand projects not only 
in the economic domain, but also in the scientific domain, which do not in any way 
take into account social or financial costs. 


As a result, human decision-making with an element of science will have to 
successively displace free market processes as spontaneous and become the 
mainstream model. In such a reality, there will also be a place for the free market as 
a complementary element, functioning in synergy with the future mainstream model. 
It is no less important to be aware that the role of science will become dominant in 
the most crucial and strategic sectors of the economy, including major areas of social 
life. 


We need to realise that many of the problems we create ourselves, by virtue 
of our intellectual level and conscious action, are so highly complex that, in 
order to solve them, a simple algorithm, e.g. a free market one, is not 
enough, but it is precisely our intentional action, representing the same level 
of complexity, which will be able to meet such challenges, that is required. 


The sooner we initiate these necessary processes, the sooner we will reap their 
positive fruits in the form of a more efficient material and immaterial development of 
our civilisation for the overall benefit of all mankind. 


Sylwester Fiet 
March 2023 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 22 


List of graphics 


Graphic 1 – Three levels/stages of the economy........................................4

Graphic 2 – Comparison of two investment models.......................................6

Graphic 3 – Comparison of two layouts................................................10

Graphic 4 – Impact of economy and science on the development of civilisation.........17

Graphic 5 – Process with and without intermediate element............................19



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 23 


Annex to The Optimized Economy Manifesto 
Entries from social networks: Facebook and Platform X (formerly Twitter) 


The Natural Asymmetric Of Human Action, which is in contrast to the linear nature 
of economic assumptions, including the free market, enforces the need to apply control 
over certain economic processes in a coordinated manner in order to reduce the 
undesirable inertia that characterises classical economics. 


Sylwester Fiet 


Manufacturers deliberately age their products. The over 100-year-old bulb described 
below is an example of this. With modification, it would be a great product. 


Over 100 years ago, a light bulb was produced that still shines today! The bulb is 
currently (at 2024) in the Livermore fire station in California, US. 


Would you like to have such good products? Unfortunately, this is unrealistic today. 
A manufacturer will not make as much money on a reliable product as on a perishable 
one. 


Nevertheless, the myth of the free market holds good. Why? Because, like any 
phenomenon, although it will be patently absurd, if it persists long enough, it will 
perpetuate itself in public perception as something tried and natural. 


This was also the case with communism and, even before that, feudalism. It is so with 
everything. 


Its time to change it! 


Sylwester Fiet 


Continuous economic growth is largely enforced by the lack of durability of 
manufactured products. The lack of durability of material goods is often the deliberate 
result of the actions of producers who, in their pursuit of short-term profit, abandon 
their concern for quality. This is not an accusation against producers, but rather an 
indication of an error at a systemic level. 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 24 


This is a classic example of form over substance, where the point of producing goods 
should be to use them as well as possible and for as long as possible. This leads to a 
waste of natural resources and has a negative impact on the environment and human 
health. It also generates high costs that are deferred, and fosters a preference for quick 
returns at the expense of responsibility and long-term benefits. 


The above example shows that irrationally set rules, as well as a faulty link (indirect) 
between the original intention and the goal achieved, inevitably lead to undesirable end 
results. 


Ignoring this situation is partly due to human nature, which tends to simplify cause- 
and-effect relationships while having difficulty seeing them in a more complex, abstract 
form. 


It is time that, in an era of rapid technological development in the economy, ad hoc 
profits finally gave way to a rational strategy based on the potential of science! 


Sylwester Fiet 


Economic Growth is largely enforced by the lack of durability of manufactured 
products. It also contributes to the waste of natural resources and 
environmental degradation. 


Man, unlike other species, is by nature a being who actively creates reality. He 
takes initiatives that, in most cases, organise his activities and are a key 
condition for continuous development. As a rational being, yet clearly cut off 
from the influence of instincts, he is condemned to be constantly active in 
shaping his environment. 


Despite the mistakes made in the development of civilisation, man, thanks to 
uninterrupted progress, can and should primarily rely on reality created on his 
own initiative, rather than on spontaneous mechanisms. Reality shows that 
sooner or later, at some point, he is forced to abandon such solutions in favour 
of those he has developed himself. This applies to all areas of life, and the area 
of the economy is no exception. 


It is time for a change and to apply a strategy based on the potential of science! 


Sylwester Fiet 



____________________


Optimized Economy / The Optimized Economy Manifesto Page 25 


Optimized Economy 
https://optimizedeconomy.blogspot.com/ 
Author: Sylwester Fiet 

Plock, Poland 2023 


Contact: sylwester1975p@gmail.com 